---
layout:     post
title:      Clone Disk Images to Save Time and Network Usage
date:       2015-10-25
summary:    How to copy Logical Volumes (LVs) instead of always performing a fresh installation.
categories: xen ubuntu virtualization
---
I have installed [Ubuntu](https://www.ubuntu.com) over a dozen times in the last week - a couple on bare metal and many more as guests under Xen. I have gotten pretty good at navigating the menus and options, but it still takes time to fill in fields and click "Continue". And the data usage according to my ISP...

There has to be a better way.

<!-- more -->

That better way is to copy an already-installed system's disk and use that for subsequent guests/instances.

# Assumptions
Below are a couple of assumptions that the rest of the post rely upon.

* an already installed "template" system that has been shutdown (powered off)
* the template and target systems are virtual machines
* the template and target will use the same disk sizes
* (optional) network settings use DHCP to prevent IP collisions
* (optional) needed/wanted packages are already installed on the template instance

The template instance - the instance that all other instances are based upon - should have as much installed and updated as possible. This will reduce time and network usage in the long run.

For example, if the function of the instances is to run `nginx`, then `nginx` should be installed before continuing.

# Duplicate Those Disks
**NOTE: The template instance must be shutdown (powered off)! Otherwise there is a risk of data loss!**

In the examples below, the template installation is `mesos01` and is being used to create `mesos02` and `mesos03`.

## Create New Disks
Create disks for the new instances. The steps below use [LVM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_Volume_Manager_%28Linux%29); your tools may differ.

Run `lvcreate` to create new, blank volumes for the new instances. The size (`-L 200G`) matches exactly with the template instance (`mesos01`).

{% highlight text linenos %}
cdcd@xen01:~$ sudo lvcreate -L 200G -n mesos02 /dev/xen01-vg
  Logical volume "mesos02" created.
cdcd@xen01:~$ sudo lvcreate -L 200G -n mesos03 /dev/xen01-vg
  Logical volume "mesos03" created.
cdcd@xen01:~$ sudo lvs
  LV        VG       Attr       LSize   Pool Origin Data%  Meta%  Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
  mesos01   xen01-vg -wi-ao---- 200.00g                                                    
  mesos02   xen01-vg -wi-ao---- 200.00g                                                    
  mesos03   xen01-vg -wi-ao---- 200.00g                                                    
{% endhighlight %}

## Copy Disks
Use the `dd` tool to copy the template instance's disk to the new volumes. The `if` argument is the input; `of` is the output target. In context for this exercise, `if` is the template instance, `of` is a new instance.

{% highlight text linenos %}
cdcd@xen01:~$ sudo dd if=/dev/xen01-vg/mesos01 of=/dev/xen01-vg/mesos02 bs=10M
20480+0 records in
20480+0 records out
214748364800 bytes (215 GB) copied, 3215.04 s, 66.8 MB/s
{% endhighlight %}

## Do It In One Go
Here is a quick `for` loop to do it all at once.

{% highlight bash linenos %}
for i in 02 03; do
  name="mesos${i}"
  new_lv="/dev/xen01-vg/${name}"
  sudo lvcreate -L 200G -n $name /dev/xen01-vg
  sudo dd if=/dev/xen01-vg/mesos01 of=$new_lv bs=1M
done
{% endhighlight %}

# Make Them Unique
At this point, all of the cloned instances will have the same network settings and hostname. Actually, they have the same everything -- including SSH credentials and host keys!

## Fix Hostnames
Hostnames can be changed by editing `/etc/hostname` and should be changed to suit the particular instance. Do not forget about `/etc/hosts`!

Reboot to ensure the change takes effect.

## Reset OpenSSH Keys
It is a bad idea to have multiple hosts using the same SSH keys. The process below resets the host keys for a debian-based system.

Steps:

1. Delete current keys (`ssh_host_*`)
1. Regenerate keys (`dkpkg-reconfigure`)
1. Restart SSH server (`systemctl restart ssh`)

{% highlight text linenos %}
cdcd@mesos03:~$ sudo rm -rf /etc/ssh/ssh_host_*
cdcd@mesos03:~$ sudo dpkg-reconfigure openssh-server
Creating SSH2 RSA key; this may take some time ...
2048 db:34:fd:9f:99:11:0f:9c:a6:06:18:7a:3c:da:c3:db /etc/ssh/ssh_host_rsa_key.pub (RSA)
Creating SSH2 DSA key; this may take some time ...
1024 7d:97:35:e9:32:1f:ac:9d:79:3f:a7:ac:f7:e0:6c:27 /etc/ssh/ssh_host_dsa_key.pub (DSA)
Creating SSH2 ECDSA key; this may take some time ...
256 8e:1f:5a:7d:36:84:8e:15:d3:1c:7f:0f:4a:4b:91:ff /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ecdsa_key.pub (ECDSA)
Creating SSH2 ED25519 key; this may take some time ...
256 a8:89:8e:8b:59:8e:96:8a:27:c4:54:bc:a5:78:3b:24 /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key.pub (ED25519)
cdcd@mesos03:~$ sudo systemctl restart ssh
{% endhighlight %}
